Xcode Lead Engineer, Anders Bertelrud.
I'm Anders Bertelrud,
Xcode Lead Engineer, as you heard.
In the previous session,
we saw a couple of ways of
increasing the productivity of Xcode.
We saw how to increase productivity
when navigating your project,
in particular with the detail lists,
finding the right files,
the files by name and by content,
that kind of thing.
We saw editing,
how to get productive with that.
We saw some source code management,
how to use documentation, workflow,
that kind of thing.
So in this session,
what I'd like to do is to dive down
a little bit on the build system,
and we can take a look at some
of the ways specifically of
increasing productivity when
building your projects in Xcode.
So let's take the hood off.
So what we're going to cover is
we're going to start with talking
about the Xcode project model.
Just a brief summary,
we've talked about a lot of
concepts in all these sessions,
like targets and files and build phases,
that kind of stuff.
But sometimes it can be a little
bit tricky to keep it all straight.
So I just want to get real basic and talk
about some of the concepts real quickly.
And then we're going to talk about
optimizing the build performance.
Some of the things that you can
do to speed up the things that
your project's already doing.
So the kinds of builds that you're
already doing on your projects.
Then we're going to talk a
little bit about how to automate
some of the common tasks.
There may be things you are doing using
Finder or the command line that we can
actually set up to be done automatically.
Maybe even at night using
automatic script to run so you
don't even have to worry about it.
So we'll talk about this.
We'll start with the project model.
So...
[Transcript missing]
"File references that are not
actually part of any target at all.
And well, what are these useful for?
Well, you know,
maybe you want to have a to-do list or
you have Read Me or something like that.
Some people actually use Xcode to
manage their recipe collection.
And admittedly, most of you actually have
projects that build products.
So for you,
this would probably be a to-do
list or something like that."
So another thing that we have in a
project is dependencies between targets.
And this is fairly logical, right?
If you have a library in an application,
you want to make sure the library is up
to date before you try to build the app.
Fairly simple.
We also have build styles,
and we'll get to those
a little bit more later,
but they're actually separate entities
in a project that get applied to a
target dynamically when you build.
We'll talk about that in more detail.
So here's another case,
which related to a question that we had
just recently from the previous session.
You can actually have one
project that refers to another.
So in this case, we still have the first
project as the file references,
targets as usual.
Files belong to the targets,
nothing special there.
The second one is files, targets,
files belong to targets.
And there's the dependencies between
the targets within a project.
But there's something more we can do.
We can actually add a project
reference to the first project,
in which case we have a
link to the other project.
So now the first project,
the one on the left,
actually knows about the
project on the right.
And therefore,
we can set up dependencies between the
targets between the different projects.
So this can be very useful.
We still, of course,
have the build styles,
and they can actually apply to builds of
the targets in the secondary projects.
We'll go into that a little bit more.
So we talked about targets.
Well, what are these targets then?
We talked about application and
library and those kinds of things.
Those are really product types,
the types of things you want to build.
The target types more
refer to build systems.
So we have this dependency layer
that goes between the targets.
Those were the red dashed arrows
you saw in the previous diagram.
So you can have your application,
your library, et cetera.
But each target can have
its own build system.
And so we'll see how this can be useful.
The first kind are native targets.
This is what Xcode really shines with.
This is where the dependency
graph is maintained continuously,
up-to-date, internally,
so we can show nice up-to-date
information about it.
Native targets currently
support applications,
frameworks, libraries, plugins.
And there is project-level
support for multiple OS SDKs.
So you can be on Panther and
you can build for Tiger,
for example.
They provide the best integration
with the user interface.
But sometimes that's not feasible.
So sometimes you have other kinds
of targets that you want to use.
So one other kind are what
we call external targets.
And the icon here is a shell
command or a command line tool icon
because it actually lets you invoke
any command line tool at all.
And you can typically invoke things like
new make or ant or those kinds of things.
Typically, they're used if you have maybe
an open source project or a
project that is cross-platform.
But you can actually invoke
any script or command,
as we'll see a little
bit later on in a demo.
Xcode also supports
Project Builder Jam-style targets.
So for those of you who had
projects in Project Builder,
there was a separate command
line tool called Jam,
stands for Just Another Make.
And that's what, it was an external tool,
the pipeline for the information
between the IDE and the
build tool wasn't that great,
so that's why we have native targets.
But the Jam targets still
support everything that
they did in Project Builder.
We did this specifically so that you'd
be able to transition your projects from
Project Builder to Xcode very easily.
Um...
It's a good idea to
convert to native targets.
There's a menu item for that.
The only thing not supported as native
targets in Xcode 1.5 are Java targets.
We're working on that.
And the architecture of Xcode
is actually fairly flexible.
So in the future,
we plan to allow you to plug in
customized support for other kinds
of build systems if you want to.
We don't have that yet.
We're hard at work on that when we're
not doing presentations for WWDC.
So that's a little bit
about target types.
So these things determine
what gets built,
but how do we determine how to build it?
Well, these are the build settings,
right?
So they control the inner
workings of a build.
They're like the properties,
it's like new make variables,
analogous to that.
So they're individual properties.
One setting's value can
actually refer to another one.
This is somewhat powerful.
You can define a setting that has
the path of a common directory and
then base everything off of that.
For example, the install path can
actually refer to $home.
Turns out that home is one of
the build settings that gets
inherited from the environment,
so that can be kind of nice.
Build settings are passed
as environment variables.
I mentioned external targets.
We pass that in the environment.
So if you have an external shell script
or a new make target or whatever,
they will actually have access to that.
Of course, for native targets,
it doesn't really matter.
There is no external
command to be called.
Build settings can be
set at various levels.
We'll see that shortly.
They're usually set on
a particular target,
because that's the most natural place
to set a preference or a build default
is on the product that gets built.
And there's an ordering
for build settings,
so that your customized
values override the defaults,
and the build styles
override the target values,
et cetera.
The higher levels
override the lower levels.
So what are the levels?
Well, here's the precedence.
At the bottom, we have the inherited
environment variables.
These are just the basic
things like the home variables.
They come from a terminal.
If you're purely an ID user,
you probably don't care
so much about this.
After that come the
built-in default settings.
There's a lot of these, right?
These are all the default settings
for all the compilers or linkers
or whatever you have installed.
So whether or not optimization
is on or off by default,
that kind of thing.
Above that are the target settings.
The build style settings come above that.
We'll talk a little bit
more in detail about that.
And above that are the
command line settings.
Well, what's this?
Well, for the IDE itself,
this is always empty.
This is always a moot point.
But it turns out you can actually
build a project from the command line,
and that's where this gets useful.
You can overwrite any setting at all
from the command line when you invoke
what's called Xcode build to build
your project from the command line.
The environment variables
we talked about,
these get inherited.
The built-in defaults
are the linker settings,
that kind of thing, the default values.
Target settings are real interesting,
so we're going to drill it
down and talk more about those.
You set the target settings in the
Build tab of the Target Inspector or
the Target Info window.
So we see the little red circle there,
how you get to that.
And that opens up this panel.
And here we see the settings.
It's just a list.
You saw this in the previous session.
It shows the inherited default values
as well as anything you've customized.
Anything that you've
customized is shown in bold.
And the inherited ones are not in bold.
Also, I mentioned the build settings.
Anything set in a build setting
trumps the values at lower levels.
So we show in strikethrough,
we show the ones that are
set in build settings.
So this indicates that the dead
code stripping setting is actually
overridden in the current build style.
Something else here is we have a
pop-up menu that lets you focus
on a category of build settings.
I think this was shown in
the introduction to Xcode,
but it's worth pointing out again that
you can actually click on that table
heading there and narrow down your focus.
And of course, we have the search field,
which lets you find any
setting that you want quickly.
And this matches not only
the name of the setting,
but also we search in the
help string for that setting.
So if you type in,
if you're not sure or if you can't
find the setting you're looking for,
try typing a phrase related
to that into the field here.
OK, so much for target settings.
That's pretty simple.
So build style settings,
let's talk about that.
These guys are set in a similar manner.
They allow for variations on targets,
so debug versus release,
the pro version of the
app versus a demo version,
let's say.
As I mentioned, the build styles override
anything at the lower level.
Some examples of how to use build styles.
You can, for example,
build without debugging symbols.
This is fairly obvious.
You can build with zero link,
enable or disable.
Zero link is a feature that
we use at development time,
but we really don't want to
use while we ship the product.
Different optimization levels,
pretty easy.
Alternative algorithms.
Suppose you're trying out
some new hash table algorithm.
You want to build one variation of
your app with the old algorithm,
one variation with the new one,
and do some performance tests, let's say.
You can enable or disable features.
If you do a demo version of the app,
you want to disable save.
And with dead code stripping,
the code's going to get removed as well.
That's a feature that's new to 1.5.
You may want to set different build
output paths so that you have your
debug build object files going
to one place and your deployment
build going to the other place.
So why not just have multiple targets,
right?
I mean, we already have separate targets.
Well, you could,
but let's consider an example, right?
So what if I have an application,
and let's say that I have a demo
version of that application,
right?
So all we do there is we set a special
pound to find that turns off saving,
okay?
Let's say there's a support
library that they all rely on.
But actually, so I've been doing
development for a month,
and so let's see, okay, well,
what I've actually been developing
is my debug version of these things,
right?
So now it comes time to deploy.
Well, I want to optimize better.
I want to maybe turn
off some debug logging,
that kind of stuff.
So I really have another version
of each of these targets.
And then suppose I want to have
yet a third style where I say,
well, let me try that new hash algorithm.
I still want to have optimization on so
I can really do the performance testing.
So now I have really yet a third
set of each of the targets.
So all told, I have nine targets.
And really what I have, though,
if you look at them,
is a combination of three targets
times three variations on each.
We coalesce these into build styles.
We get rid of these.
So what we really have is M plus
N as opposed to M times N.
So build styles are multiple targets,
right?
You can use multiple targets
and just ignore build styles.
That's fine.
But they're there and especially
helpful for large projects.
So let's talk about how to set those,
the settings there.
We go to, actually, the project,
if you notice,
what's selected here is the
project icon up at the top.
Build styles are attached to the project,
not to each target.
So we inspect the project,
and that's where we see a
list of the build styles.
So this is in the styles tab.
If you notice at the top, the four tabs,
I've selected the styles tab.
And there I see, in the pop-up,
I see all of the styles
that are available.
window looks very familiar, right?
It's the same thing that we
see in the target inspector,
it's just now we're editing a
different level of the precedence.
One important thing or one important
way to use the build styles is
to only define the things that
are unique about that style.
So if you have some setting that
really is common to all the styles,
has the same value for all the styles,
odds are that it's not
really part of the variation.
So that's one thing to keep in mind.
One interesting thing is that you can
actually refer to the overridden value.
You don't actually have to
obliterate whatever is defined below.
You can just append to it.
So if you have a bunch
of preprocessor macros,
you can say $VALUE and sort
of capture the overridden
value and then just add to it.
That was a little bit
about build style settings.
There's more in the documentation you can
reach from the pink Help button there.
Again, we talked about the
command line settings.
These are for use by Xcode Build.
I'll talk about that a little bit later.
Another thing that native
targets have is build rules.
These are just like the rules
that you would define in
Make or any language like that.
They control how source
files are processed.
Every rule consists of a
condition and an action.
The condition matches on the kind
of file that you want to process.
The first matching rule is used.
What Xcode does is that it
matches on either file type.
This is the abstract file type,
such as all C-like language files,
which would include the Xcode file type.
You can use the Xcode C, C++,
Objective-C, that kind of stuff.
Or you can match on specific patterns.
The file name pattern matching
is particularly useful if you
have something like a custom
extension for a custom file format.
Let's say you have a unique
image file format that you use.
You're developing a game.
You can set up a rule that will take
files with that suffix and pipe them
through some translation tool that
compiles the image or whatever so that
it can load faster into your game.
That's just an example.
You can use them to select
the compiler and version.
For example, GCC 3.5,
there's a preview of that
on the DVD that you got.
And you can use build rules to
select between GCC 3.3 and 3.5.
The default is 3.3,
but you can easily just change
the pop-up to select 3.5.
Another example is Java C versus JEGS.
And as I mentioned,
you can also use them to generate,
translate files,
or even generate custom source code.
The outputs of a build rule are piped
back into the build rule machinery,
so you can generate some cascading
rule applications this way.
You edit the build rules using, again,
the target inspector.
You go to the Rules tab this time.
Pretty obvious.
We see here that you can define,
you can use a custom script if you want,
and there are some macros that
you can access for the name
of the file being processed.
Again, the pink question mark icon there
is your friend when it comes to
help about what's going on here.
As we see here,
the system rules are defined down
below and the custom rules are above.
If you remember,
I said the first matching rule is used.
So custom rules at the target level
override anything at the system.
We have a fairly extensive set of
built-in types that Xcode recognizes.
And if you notice at the bottom, well,
it's pretty low, but the last item says
source files matching.
That's where you can type in, let's say,
startup food.
So that's the condition.
The action shows all the compilers and
translators that Xcode knows about.
And you can also type in a custom script
in any scripting language you like.
So that's a little bit about build rules.
As I show you,
you can define actually what
the output path is going to be.
This ties into Xcode's
dependency analysis.
So your script is only run if the
inputs are newer than the outputs.
OK.
So let me show a little demo,
just show where some of these things are.
Could I have the demo machine, please?
Thanks.
OK,
so I have here just a version of Sketch.
And what I wanted to show
was a couple of things.
In so many of these demos, you know,
we've just kind of opened something
and build it and shows that it builds.
I figured I'd do something a
little bit different and actually
show you just where the items are,
some of the more
commonly asked questions.
So one of the big ones is if
you select the project icon
up here and then say Info,
that's how you get access to the styles.
They're not underneath the targets.
The target has its own settings,
so we can inspect that too.
And actually,
I inspected the target Smart Group,
which has nothing.
But I can select each
target and show that.
But again,
the project is what has the styles.
If you notice here, there are a couple of
items that are in bold.
These are overridden.
I've actually here,
I've overridden the output
location for both the
intermediates and for the products.
And so what's going to happen
here is that when I build with
the development build style,
it's going to put everything
into a subdirectory called debug.
If you build with a deployment,
it's going to put them just
into the default location.
So that's fairly useful.
This is also where you can define
new styles up here in the project
inspector and name your own build style,
that kind of thing.
You can obviously edit build styles
and delete them and that kind of stuff.
So one other thing that
I wanted to show is that when
we have string list settings,
you can actually edit the
value using a sheet now.
And if I can find one,
let's say preprocessor definitions.
Can narrow it down there.
Preprocessor defines.
I can say edit setting,
and I actually get the sheet to
edit individual list items in here.
So I can do that if I choose.
One other thing I wanted
to show is the build rules.
Again, here's the rules editor.
Now, notice again that this
is at the target level,
so each target can define its own rules.
Here are the inherited ones,
and I can also, of course,
add my own rule,
and I can choose whatever I like here.
One thing that you may find
useful is you notice I can
only select the target up here.
We actually have another pop-up menu
that you can add to your toolbar.
If you end up using build styles a lot,
like I do, for example,
you can actually just add another
pop-up for the build style.
And so the way to read this is, okay,
I'm going to build the sketch target.
I'm going to build it with either --
for either deployment or development.
And that can be a fairly
handy thing to do.
So just a little overview of this.
Can we go back to the slides,
So we talked about the
project model a little bit.
That was sort of a quick
introduction or a quick refresher.
Let's talk really about
optimizing build performance.
That's why you're here, right?
Increasing productivity with Xcode.
So speeding up the builds.
Well, what occurs during a build?
Xcode has a fast,
powerful build system and it keeps
a lot of information internally.
So some features are automatic.
We talked about the dependency
analysis that's always kind of
being updated in the background so
that when you hit the build hammer,
we already know what's
up to date and not.
We talked about parallel builds.
If you have a dual CPU machine,
Xcode automatically takes
advantage of both CPUs.
Zero link,
these are all things you've heard about.
Predictive compilation you may
not have heard so much about.
We'll talk a little bit more about that.
The basic idea is that we can start
compiling while you're still editing your
file so that by the time you save your
file and you actually hit the hammer,
we're done compiling it.
And that works really nicely,
especially when you have
single file turnaround.
So those are some automatic things.
There are some things you can
do to optimize your project.
One of the biggest things is
to add a precompiled header.
Xcode comes, well,
Mac OS X comes with a lot of
SDKs and a lot of headers,
and there's just a lot of declarations
that the compiler has to see every
time it compiles a source file.
So we can speed up some of that
work by doing it only once.
Another big thing is distributed builds.
I'm sure you've heard of this too.
Maybe you don't know
quite how to enable it,
configure it, that kind of stuff.
We'll talk a little bit about that.
Fix and continue is another thing that
you saw in the introduction sessions.
How many people are actually used then?
OK.
Try it out.
It works most of the time.
There are some caveats that
other sessions have gone into.
If you change the size of a structure,
that kind of thing.
Basically, this patches your code
while it's running,
so you don't even have to
quit and restart the app.
And it can be really a time saver.
But let's talk a little bit more about
the compile-- edit/compile/debug cycle.
So let's say we're editing a file.
That takes some time, right?
And then we have-- let's
say we edit four files.
We end up-- this is the slow case.
We end up compiling
each of the four files,
and then we link,
and then we start the program.
So one of the things we can do,
as I mentioned-- here's the
timeline that this all takes.
One of the things we
can do is set up a PCH,
a Precompiled Header.
This cuts each compilation down
to a fraction of what it was.
So we shorten the overall time.
OK, that's pretty straightforward.
Another thing we can do is
to use ZeroLink to enable
that during development.
It is enabled by default
for development builds.
So that cuts out the
link during development.
So now we've shortened
it a little bit more.
Still, we have the CPU marching
through each processor,
like that, kind of just compiling it,
and then finally we start the program.
So let's do it in parallel.
If we have dual CPU, we can have each
CPU actually going through,
compiling, and we're done in a
shorter amount of time.
But we can do even better.
Suppose instead of just using two CPUs,
we used one of ours or two
of ours to take the data,
preprocess it somehow,
send it out across the wire,
To other machines,
let those compile the files
and send the results back.
And then we just harvest the results.
So that shortens the time.
And that is great for large builds,
especially when you have lots of files.
Suppose we just take
the single file case.
Let's just go back to that.
So we're still back to the one file.
Even if we have dual CPUs,
if we only touch one file,
there's no point in having two CPUs.
We can't really parallelize.
We can just do that one.
So one key observation is that editing
is not very processor intensive.
So we can actually make that a
shorter box to indicate that.
And then what we see is we
can actually slide the compile
step in underneath the editing,
meaning, especially in a dual CPU,
if you have two,
you can be editing with one and
compiling with the other one.
So what Xcode actually does is to
send down the first part of the file
and then wait until you hit Save,
and then it sends the rest of it.
So that shortens the compile time.
And then the last thing is,
as I mentioned, fix and continue.
We can get rid of restarting
your app entirely in most cases.
So you can just keep on patching the
code in your app until you find that
you need to change a structure or do
anything more significant like that.
So that's a fairly short compile time
compared to what we started out with.
So precompiled headers.
So that's a nice graphic,
but how do we actually do this?
Well,
what you do is we use the observation
that most of the code is in the headers.
The compiler sees the same
code over and over again,
unless we're using precompiled headers.
One example, I just found a small one,
a little C++ file under
developer examples.
And this is the ucarbon-event.cpp.
And it's actually 54 lines long.
And this is actually the
whole text of that file.
So it's a very tiny C++ file, right?
But one of the interesting things here,
and expensive ones,
is we see that it says
import Carbon slash Carbon.h.
So what does that end up doing?
Well, it actually ends up dwarfing
the code that you typed,
because this ends up being 90,944
lines that the compiler has to see.
So this is actually not even the scale.
The grade line there
would have disappeared.
It's actually 0.06% of the code
that came from your project.
And 99.94% came from the system headers.
So the obvious thing to do is to create
a precompiled header for a Carbon.h.
So, GCC 3.3 and 3.5 support
precompiled headers and they're
pretty easy to set up in Xcode.
What you do is you create a prefix header
that gets implicitly included in front
of every source file in your target.
It's at a per target level.
And then, you just check the checkbox
that says precompile this thing.
Xcode automatically figures out which
different versions of it it needs to do.
For example,
if you pass different preprocessor
macros in different headers,
it actually builds it correctly for you.
Keep in mind, though,
the prefix header gets included for
every source file in the target,
so it has to be compatible
with every source file.
If you have C++ and Objective C++,
then you need to use
#ifdef appropriately.
There's a really nice help page on
that in the Xcode documentation.
You search for PCH.
The other thing to keep in mind is even
if you have a correct prefix header,
it can get precompiled too many times
if you put change in headers in it.
So the trick here is to
put all the stable code,
typically the system code,
which hardly ever changes except
when you update the software,
you put that in the precompiled header,
and then you leave all your user
code to be compiled every time.
And the other thing I mentioned
is Xcode does precompile
the prefix header on demand,
which means that if you change
the input conditions so that
the precomp is no longer valid,
Xcode will rebuild it for you.
So that's a little bit
about pre-compelled headers.
Just shortly about distributed builds,
there's some questions we get about that.
Xcode automatically uses all CPUs, right?
But why limit yourself
to your own machine?
There's lots of CPUs.
We only ship dual CPUs,
but you could have a 14 CPU machine
if you use all the other machines
in the offices next to you.
The way to do this,
the way to enable this,
is to go to the Xcode preferences.
And there are two
things you can set here.
You can set whether your machine
should use other machines to
precompile-- to distribute to.
And you can set up at the bottom
there whether your own machine
should be a distributed build server.
Some things to keep in mind.
It's only available on the 3.3 and 3.5.
That's not so big of an issue
for most of you who are on 3.3.
Obviously, the faster your network and
the faster your machines are,
the more benefit you're going to have.
And it really does require
100BaseT network to be effective,
because with machines,
even the PowerBooks being so fast,
anything slower than that,
it's often faster just to compile locally
than to send it out and get it back.
Okay.
The ideal number of machines
we've found is between 4 and 10.
That's a very fuzzy number.
It just really depends on your project.
But it's probably not the case
that adding 200 XSERVs is going
to make it 200 times faster than
not having distributed builds.
So there is definitely a
fall-off at some point.
Keep in mind the security
of your source code.
This is a concern for some of
you and not at all for others.
There are two modes.
One is rendezvous.
This means go out and find any
server who's willing to compile my
code and let it compile my code.
But that means that you're sending
your source code to that machine.
So you need to make sure that that's
something that you want to do.
The other option is to
specify a list of servers.
You could do that in the panel that
I showed you in the previous slide.
You can actually just specify a list.
And if you enable rendezvous,
it will actually show you the list
of the servers that are within range.
And you can check off which ones you
want and limit the list that way to,
let's say, a set of secure machines
in a lab somewhere.
So we talk about precompiled
headers and distributed builds,
zero link.
This is fairly automatic.
There isn't much to talk about here,
except to observe the link time is a
significant part of the turnaround time.
And typically, you're editing only a
couple of source files.
So the interesting thing here and where
you need to be aware is that it runs
the code directly from the object files.
It does only work for applications
and command line tools right
now for technical reasons.
The big thing to be
aware of is keep in mind,
it runs from the object code.
So therefore, you don't want to do this
when you deploy your app.
The deployment build style is set up to
not use zero link by default so that you
actually get a real app that gets linked.
Don't ship zero link builds,
because it's going to try to access the
.o files back on your build machine.
If you get this-- I don't know if
you can see this-- but basically,
it says zero link could not load .o file,
and then it gives a path of the .o file.
That indicates that-- you took the
binary stub that was built for zero
link and took it to another machine,
and the binary stub is about 10k big,
and all the .o files are still
back in your old machine.
That's a symptom of that.
And the fix, of course,
is turn off Zerolink
for deployment builds.
Predictive compilation,
I just want to mention a little bit.
This is off by default,
so here's something that you can
do to increase your productivity.
Normally,
even if the PCH doesn't get used,
nothing happens until you have build.
So here's the idea again that we can get
a head start by using those idle cycles
while you're editing and start compiling.
We send the first couple
of pound includes,
which typically include heavyweights
like Carbon.h or Cocoa.h,
and get the compiler really
chewing on that stuff first.
And then while you're
still typing your code,
the compiler is just sitting idle.
And then when you save,
we send the rest of the data.
And then when you have build,
oftentimes the compilation is
already done and the .o file is
just sitting there ready to be used.
So it effectively essentially eliminates
the compile step for single editing.
Even if you're editing multiple
files before hitting run again,
if you edit them in sequence,
it actually can eliminate
the compile step entirely.
The way to turn this on,
there's a checkbox in the pref panel.
So that's all you have to do for that.
It's automatic after that.
I'm going to show a little bit of that.
Okay, what I wanted to show first here
is if we inspect the target again,
see that I have--let me see here
if I can find the prefix header.
There we go.
So I've set here SKT prefix.
This is the project-related path
actually to a file in a project.
So let's take a look at that.
I just type prefix.
You can use the handy
detail view to get to it.
All this one does is include Cocoa.h.
If you had C++ in here,
this would still work
because of the guard macro.
That's what I was talking about before.
The Precompile Prefix Header
checkbox is obviously the one
that causes it to be precompiled.
You could have a Prefix Header even
if you didn't want to precompile it.
That's typically not very interesting.
ZeroLink does show up in the
target inspector because,
after all,
it inspects all of the settings.
So if I choose zero here,
I see that ZeroLink actually is
overridden at the target level.
And the reason for that is
the difference between the
deployment and development builds.
So I go to the project and inspect here.
If I go to the styles,
let me narrow down again on ZeroLink.
I'll see that in the development style,
ZeroLink is checked.
In the deployment style, it's unchecked.
So that's really how
you want to do things.
Another thing I wanted to show here
is the distributed builds again.
Normally under Building,
there's some options
for the local machine.
Distributed Builds is the
prep pane that's dedicated
to the distributed builds.
I don't have set up for distributed
builds because of the demo machines here.
But it's pretty obvious
what the settings do,
but I wanted to show that
this is the panel actually
where you get access to that.
Because sometimes we get questions of,
well, how do I set this up?
Where do I even look?
Under Building,
there are some interesting options.
One thing that Xcode supports,
which is actually kind of nice,
is to build to a shared location.
This is particularly nice if
you have multiple projects.
Even if they're unrelated,
you can get all the products to
go into a particular location.
It's also good if you're working
with source code off the network
and you want to make sure that your
binaries really are on the local disk.
That's a really good
idea for performance.
The predictive compilation is off by
default and disabled by battery power,
but it's really a good
thing to be turning on.
We'll be turning that on as a default.
And another useful one is if you
want explicit control over how many
processes to run on your machine,
we'll limit it to three because we've
really seen that it can hurt the
performance or the responsiveness of your
machine if we launch too many compiles
at once on the same portal of PowerBook.
So that's a little bit about that.
One other thing I wanted to show,
actually, is
I showed how you can set
settings at a target level.
You can actually set settings at
a particular source file level,
too.
You can either navigate
down in the groups here.
You can expand the sources phase,
which are all the source
code files for that target.
Or you can just see them here.
In fact, if you select sources,
you see them all listed.
They'll have check marks because
I haven't built the project yet.
This means that it needs to build.
One of the things you can do is you
can actually select here and you
can add additional compiler flags.
And if you add compiler flags
to a particular source file,
Xcode will take care of generating
another version of the precompiled
header for that if it needs to.
So you don't have to worry about that.
Okay, so just a little bit about
those kinds of things.
Can we have the slides back?
Please?
Thanks.
So we talked about optimizing
build performance a little bit.
I just wanted to show you where to
go to set some of these settings
because of the questions we get
on the mailing list indicates
sometimes people don't know that.
Let's talk about a
really interesting topic,
though,
is automating some of the common tasks.
We talked about how to make
the things you already do,
how to do those things in Xcode, faster.
But automating common tasks gets
into territory where you may be
doing something totally by hand
that you could actually automate.
So what are some of the
ways we can do this?
We can automate the builds.
That's one of the most obvious things.
And there are a couple
of ways to do this.
One is to use the command line tool.
We have a command line
tool called Xcode Build.
I'll describe in detail.
You can use AppleScript.
Xcode is scriptable.
So for those of you who
know and love AppleScript,
you can use that.
And actually,
there is an automator stage,
an action that you can
use to build a project.
Another way you can automate
your workflow in Xcode,
the build workflow,
is to set up custom build rules.
I mentioned that.
I'll talk about some more examples.
Some custom build phases have
really interesting uses that
I haven't thought of all of them,
and I'm sure you can think of
many good ways to use them.
Same with external targets.
These are really kind of opening a
porthole into the machinery so that
you can actually hook in anything
that you like into the build phase.
Into the build sequence.
Custom executables is another
topic I want to talk about.
This is sometimes underused,
but can be extremely powerful,
especially if you're working
on libraries and plugins.
We start with building
from the command line.
The tool is called Xcode Build,
and it's in your default path.
So if you're running from terminal,
you just type Xcode Build.
It provides access to the exact
same build system as the IDE uses,
so there's no sort of compatibility
mode or any of that stuff.
It's actually the same
share of the build.
It's a library that's opening
your project and building it.
You can invoke it from the shell scripts,
for example,
or directly from the command line.
Good for nightly builds,
that kind of stuff.
The basic invocation is just Xcode Build,
and that will just bring
your project up to date,
whatever project you have changed
the working directory into.
But it has several options.
One of those is you can
say what action you want.
I mean, that's pretty obvious.
You can remove your binaries.
You can bring your project up to date.
You can actually specify.
You can specify which
target you want to build.
And this is obviously useful
if you have many targets.
I showed the target pop-up where you
can choose which target to build.
This option, the dash target option,
is actually the same
thing as that pop-up.
That's what you're controlling.
Same with the build style.
You choose a build style
development or deployment.
Typically,
if you're building from the command line,
you've been building for deployment,
and you'll want to put the
results in an installer package,
something like that.
This is the same or controls the
same setting as the pop-up for
the build style in the Xcode IDE.
And under the hood, it actually controls
literally the same setting.
So there's a high degree
of fidelity there.
You can also override build settings.
If you remember,
the gray box at the very top of the
precedence was command line options.
That's what these are.
So if you pass any of
the command line options,
either the ones that you've
defined or that are built in,
you can just override
that on the command line.
This is kind of a GNU Make style
use of the Xcode IDE,
but it's nice to have a command line
tool like this for the automated stuff.
So if you don't want to
use the command line,
you can also use AppleScript.
Xcode is scriptable.
If you go to the script editor
and you say Open Dictionary,
Xcode shows up in there and you can see
all the classes and commands we have.
Not all facilities are available
from AppleScript at this time,
but we're working on completing
that and rounding it out.
Project operations are,
you can set build settings,
you can add files, that kind of stuff.
Here, for example,
is just a little line of AppleScript that
just builds a particular target with
the current set of build settings.
So this is another way that you could
automate your build process for actually
going from source code to final disk
image that you ship to customers.
So either or.
Custom build rules are a way of
automating inside of the project,
as I mentioned, inside of each target.
I'm repeating some of the
same information here,
but I want to sort of try to
give a couple of opportunities
to help you remember it.
The essence is that a rule
controls how the target produces
and processes a source file.
So an action, it's any script you
can run from terminal.
You can even use Apple Scripts,
you can use Perl, Ruby,
that kind of stuff.
Obviously, a normal shell, Python.
As I mentioned earlier,
the build rules can declare
the path that gets produced,
the output files.
So this gets related to
the input files by Xcode.
And so your rule only gets run if
the input is newer than the output,
or if the output doesn't exist.
And the produced files are fed
right back into the rules system.
So if you produce C files,
then they get fed back in and
the rule for C files gets applied
and the C compiler is invoked.
So that's fairly handy.
For example,
custom script to generate C files
from whatever data files you have.
In fact,
the tool that you use to generate
those C files could actually be built
by another target in your project.
We've seen that in some of the
internal projects at Apple,
actually.
Other example uses, preprocessing,
generating code.
You can invoke compilers that are
not directly supported in Xcode.
We have a list of some of the
compilers that are supported.
GCC is the only C compiler
with built-in support.
There are other C compilers
and Fortran compilers,
and you can use a rule for those.
Custom build phases are a
little bit different from rules.
The rules are condition,
action kind of a thing.
Build phases are just steps in the
sequence to build your product,
and so you can add them to any
point in your native target.
And the primary uses are things
like copying arbitrary files
and running arbitrary scripts.
You may have Unix man pages.
You may have custom files that go in
custom places in your application.
You can specify inputs and outputs,
and again,
these phases get run only if needed.
And the paths are fed directly
into the Xcode dependency graph.
So some examples,
copying files and folders,
that's a popular one.
A lot of people have somewhat
complicated applications,
and they want to embed frameworks
and that kind of stuff.
You can set special permissions on files.
If you have a little extension,
that kind of thing,
that needs some special flags.
You can also install files in
arbitrary file system locations.
So that's what I mentioned
in the Unix man page.
This is maybe for more of the sort
of typical Darwin development that
has specific places in the file
system where files need to go.
Typical Mac applications should
be able to be run from anywhere.
External targets.
I mentioned this early on.
This is a way to call any kind of
external build system you have.
So you can specify the
action to invoke for build,
for clean.
All these things are
passed in the environment.
So you can actually set your
own options at the target level,
and they get passed down
through the environment.
And if you have a Perl script, let's say,
or a Shell script,
you can pick up those settings and
modify the behavior of it based on that.
So there's lots of opportunities for
weaving your own custom scripts into the
Xcode build process here to really get to
a source to disk image kind of workflow.
You can customize the command line,
as I mentioned.
You can pass any options you want.
If you have your own script
that you're invoking to drive
a part of the build system,
that's maybe not so interesting because
you could just change the script.
But suppose you're using Ant or Make,
you could do that.
There are actually project templates
to invoke the Ant build system
that are installed as part of the
Xcode install for Java development.
So you can take a look at some
of those for examples of this,
actually.
Okay, so other examples.
I think I talked about these.
Some of them already make and, yeah,
I talked about this.
PackageMaker is actually another
interesting use for this.
We tend to think of external targets
to invoke external build systems,
but any tool can be invoked.
So if you want to use it to
create a package disk image,
there are command line tools for that.
Xcode does not yet have built-in target
types for building disk images and
other kinds of deployment targets.
That's definitely something on our list.
But meanwhile,
you can actually wire it up
yourself with not that much work.
Web Server Deployment Tools is
another interesting one.
You could FTP the result of
your build over to some server,
et cetera.
Custom executables are, I think,
underused, but a very useful tool.
Every time you create
an executable target,
such as an application
or a command line tool,
Xcode automatically creates
an executable for you.
And what's an executable?
Well, it's just an execution context.
So that names something to be run,
the directory from
which it should be run,
any kind of arguments to be passed to it,
if it has any on the command line.
You can set these up
for anything you'd like.
So if you're developing
a Photoshop plugin,
you can actually set up an
executable to launch Photoshop and
have it load your plugin.
Launch parameters can be configured.
And as I mentioned,
you can create as many
of these as you want,
custom ones.
Plugin development is one.
Libraries, too.
If you're working on a
framework or library,
maybe you're,
most of you are probably shipping an
app or working on something like that.
But if you are working
on just a framework,
what you probably have is you probably
have a dozen test apps or more.
And so you could set up an executable
for each of your test applications,
each one configured to run with
your built version of the library.
And that's a great way
to test your library.
As you make a change
to your framework code,
you just hit build and run.
It will run some other app
but load in your framework.
and you can test your changes that way.
And it's useful for quickly
switching between them.
Just as there is a development,
like a build style and a target pop-up,
there is an active executable pop-up,
which controls what gets run
when you hit the Run button.
So that's another thing you
can add to your toolbar.
So I want to show a couple
of these things in action.
This time I'm actually going to show,
not just show where things are,
but actually build a couple of things.
So can we have the demo machine, please?
Thanks.
So what I'm going to
do here is to-- first,
let me just go ahead and build.
The development build style
here is the active one.
I can actually add-- I'm just
going to Control-click on here.
Let me add the active executable
to show you that sketch.
Not surprisingly,
executable is shown under here.
And you can edit any
kind of settings there.
What I wanted to do now, though, was to,
let's say, create an external target.
Let me go ahead and-- what I'm going
to do is to go into the Project menu,
just select Sketch here,
go and say New Target.
And what I'm going to do is
create a shell script target.
And let's say I want
to create a disk image.
So that's what I'm going to choose.
And I want to add it
to the Sketch project.
So that's pretty simple.
So now we have the info here.
By default, this target,
it doesn't build any
kind of product at all.
All it has is a single phase
that runs a shell script.
So I'm going to inspect the
shell script build phase.
Shell script goes here.
So I could type in a whole shell
script here if I wanted to.
But what I'm actually going to do,
I have a ready-made one that
I'll just add to the project.
So I'm just going to drag that in,
drop it here under the Groups and Files.
I want to copy this into the project,
actually.
It lives on my desktop right now,
so I'll just copy it in.
I'm not going to add it to any target,
because I don't actually want to
install the script as part of any build.
If I added it to the Sketch target,
it would get added as a resource
in the Resources bucket.
But I don't want to do that.
So I'll just go ahead and click Add.
So now I have my shell script here.
I can-- let's see, take a look at that.
And in this case-- it's a fairly-- eh,
not too complicated.
It uses AppleScript, actually.
Most of the complications use
AppleScript to configure a disk image.
What it does is just create a disk image,
use AppleScript to set position of files
and icons and color and stuff like that.
It compresses the disk image,
and then it tells the
finder to show it to us.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at that.
Now, I've added the file to my project.
But what I also want to do is, of course,
to edit the shell script
build phase itself.
So I'm just going to type
in a shell command here to,
in this case--
just invoke the shell
script that's in my project.
The shell script here gets started
up from the project folder.
So that's a fairly
succinct way of doing that.
If you notice at the bottom,
there's the input files
and the output files.
This is how I mentioned that Xcode weaves
in the shell script into its dependency
graph so that it knows when to run it.
So what I'm going to do here is
I'm actually going to add-- I'm
going to use some of the build
settings that are defined by default.
I'm going to say that in my
build products directory,
there's going to be a
application called sketch.app.
could drag this into.
These build settings,
how do I know about build product store?
Well, we have a menu item for bringing
up the HTML page for this.
We have a bunch of
built-in build settings.
Normally,
if you're just building an app in Xcode,
if you're not doing anything particular
like automating the workflow here,
you don't really need
to know about these.
But they're very useful if you
do want to do anything more,
a little bit more complicated like this.
Another thing I'm going to do is
I'm going to make the shell script
here depend on the shell script
file that I am actually including.
And what this is going to do is it's
going to mean that my shell script
gets run if the product is out of date
and also going to get run if I modify
the script that builds the disk image.
So that's kind of nice.
And what does it produce?
We need to know what to compare against.
So what this script produces
is it puts in target builder.
That's another one of the
standard defined settings.
It's going to create a sketch disk image.
So now we have this all set up.
And let's see what happens when we build.
One of the things that I do
is to make sure I pick the
deployment target so I don't try
to ship the zero link binaries.
And I'm just going to select
the create disk image target.
There's one more thing I forgot to do.
Does anybody know?
Yeah, so right now we have
two independent targets.
You can actually have two totally
separate dependency trees,
or two or more if you want, in Xcode.
But to relate these two
targets to each other,
what I want to do is I want to
bring up the inspector again.
And I want to add a dependency
from the createDiskImage
target to the Sketch target.
So this means that Sketch will
get updated before I even
try to build the disk image.
So let me get rid of a couple
of the inspectors here.
And let's just go ahead and build this.
So it's going to go ahead and
build Sketch as it normally does.
And actually,
what I'm going to do is-- it's linking.
It's not zero linking,
so that's a good sign.
So it's running the custom script.
So it's actually creating the disk
image and mounting it and setting the
background color and all that good stuff.
So now we actually end up with
a compressed disk image that
contains my built version of Sketch.
And I can ship this to my customers.
And moreover-- Thank you.
Moreover,
if I go into Xcode again and I hit Build,
see it just says Build Succeeded.
We can look at that in more detail if
we bring up the Show Detailed Results.
I'm just going to hide the
editor here because I don't
really need that right now.
Nothing happened here.
Well, that's because Xcode knows
that I haven't updated Sketch,
I have not updated the script,
and so I don't need to do anything.
If I go in here and I update the script,
one of the things I can do to
update the script is to say,
okay, here are some of the input
settings that my script takes.
Well,
let me go ahead and copy one of these.
I'm going to not define
it in the script itself,
so I'm going to save this.
What I'm actually going to do
is I'm going to set this in
the Create Disk Image Target.
So I go here and I add my own setting.
And I'm just going to make this be,
let's say, zero.
So now when I build-- and it
knows that I need to build because
I modified one of the inputs.
So now when I build,
it runs the custom shell script.
And it's going off to finder again.
And now we get a different color.
And there again,
if I hit Build once more,
nothing happens.
So this is a nice way to make sure that
we only actually do work when we need to.
So that's where the shell script
inputs and outputs come in.
All right.
So that's kind of interesting.
But we can actually do something
even a little bit more interesting
with shell script build phases.
Let me actually add another shell
script build phase to the same target.
You can either create a new target
and have it depend on other things.
You typically do that if you have your
own build system like Ant or Make.
If you just want to add a little step to
happen at the end of updating a target,
you would just add another
shell script build phase.
So I'm going to go ahead and do that.
I can do that in several ways.
I can go to the project menu here,
say new build phase.
I'm just going to control click
here on the target actually.
And I can say add new build phase.
I'm going to add a shell
script build phase,
just another one.
I get another inspector.
It looks exactly the same because
it's just another shell script.
The sequence of these matters.
So Xcode tries to run your
shell scripts in sequence.
It will, however,
respect input and output
dependencies as a higher--.
It's a higher order of precedence
than respecting the order.
In other words,
if you say that the first shell
script depends on the output
of the second shell script,
it will actually run
the second one first.
So it will respect the dependencies.
What I'm going to do in this case is I'm
actually going to use Apple script now.
So I'm going to use a
tool called osascript.
And what I want to do is I have
another little script here that
I'm going to drag into my project.
I'm going to copy it in.
I'm not going to add it because I don't
want to copy it into my product.
This is just a helper script
while I'm building my product.
And so here's a little Apple script.
And what I want to do is actually--.
I'm going to see if I can't get a little
notification here when a build completes.
So what I want to do is I want to
get an SMS when my build finishes.
So I'm just going to go ahead
and have a little script that
uses Apple script to do that.
Let me go ahead and just
type in the name of it.
Notify completion.scpt.
I don't actually need
any inputs and outputs.
In this case,
I just want it to run at the very end.
Just always run.
If I need to build something,
if anything needs to be updated,
I just want this to always run.
So we're just going to
go ahead and build again.
And we're already up to
date with the disk image,
so we shouldn't really need to do much.
What we did, though,
was we ran an Apple script
to send me a little SMS.
And--.
Okay.
So now I'm going to
go ahead and run this.
And I'm going to go ahead and run this.
Okay.
So the build finished.
And actually,
it says here build succeeded,
but you can't see that.
So that's an innovative use, I guess,
for build phases.
So go forth and experiment with that.
All right.
So can we have the slides back, please?
OK, so just to summarize-- OK,
slides were out of order.
Just to summarize,
one of the things we-- I mentioned,
Xcode has a lot of built-in features.
A lot of them you don't
have to know about.
Some of them you just have to enable,
like predictive compilation.
Zero link, all this kind of stuff
just works out of the box.
Some are transparent, right?
Zero link, predictive compilation,
that kind of stuff.
Others do require some setup because
there are inputs that Xcode cannot know,
such as with your prefix header,
what's the nature of your project?
What kind of headers is it that
you use that are not changing?
There are some things Xcode
can do to analyze this.
We're thinking about how to make this
even more automatic in the future.
But for now, set up a prefix header.
Make sure it's pre-compiled.
This will save a lot of times
during build and really get
some good build performance.
Distributed builds is another way.
If I'm sitting in a coffee
shop with my PowerBook,
this isn't going to help me much.
But if I'm in the office-- and I have
a build farm that's just a couple of
meters away-- this can really speed up,
especially a batch build.
If you have a large application
and you do nightly builds,
this can be a real time saver.
Custom build phases and build rules,
a little bit different, right?
They're not helping you speed up the
things that you're already doing,
such as building your app,
but they help you automate
some of the things that you
might be having to do by hand.
And even if you have existing
scripts to do something,
like build a disk image,
we've seen how you can actually
weave that into Xcode and to get
Xcode to invoke it at the right time.
So explore the possibilities
and use the mailing list,
the Xcode help,
and learn about these features,
and use the great documentation
that talks about these features.
So for some of the more information,
there's actually sample code
and some example projects
here at connect.apple.com.
I think you've seen this
address in many other sessions.
Some sessions,
there's the samples that we show,
the demos.
You can actually download those,
play with that yourself.
Obviously, the Xcode build system
and the reference library,
especially for the build settings,
they're all documented.
They're in the HTML pages.
There's a normal Xcode help.
of course on the release notes.
I'd like to, is Matthew Formica here?
No, okay, we have virtual Matthew.
So I'm going to ask virtual
Matthew to come up on stage again.
This is Wiley.
And at this point,
I'd like to also ask the rest of
the Xcode team to come up for Q&A.